# Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2)

**Note**: lecture notes this semester will be somewhat limited and largely quoted from the lecture since the majority of the class is slide-based presentations. This file will contain mainly optional readings, quizzes, and extra in-depth materials (if necessary).

## Readings And Additional Resources

### Additional Readings

- [Software-Defined Networking: A Comprehensive Survey](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1406.0440.pdf)

- [ONOS: Towards an Open, Distributed SDN OS](http://www-cs-students.stanford.edu/~rlantz/papers/onos-hotsdn.pdf)

- [P4: Programming Protocol-Independent Packet Processors](https://www.sigcomm.org/sites/default/files/ccr/papers/2014/July/0000000-0000004.pdf)

- [A Software Defined Internet Exchange](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/2740070.2626300?download=true)

### Optional Readings

- [P4 Language tutorial](https://github.com/p4lang/tutorials/tree/master/exercises/basic)

- [An Industrial-Scale Software Defined Internet Exchange Point](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/nsdi16/nsdi16-paper-gupta.pdf)

## Section Quizzes

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 1 Quiz

1. _In a software defined networking, every device (switch, router, middlebox, etc.) must be able to make decisions in the forwarding process_.
   - False
2. _The transition to IPv6 would be faster with a software defined networking paradigm compared to a conventional networking paradigm_.
   - True
3. _An OpenFlow switch may also be used for routing_.
   - True
4. _The management plane <...> a network policy_.
   - Defines
5. _The control plane <...> a network policy_.
   - Enforces
6. _The data plane <...> a network policy_.
   - Executes

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 2 Quiz

1. _Load balancing is only possible with software defined networking_.
   - False
2. _In software defined networking, which network application would take precedence when managing incoming traffic_?
   - Load balancing
3. _In conventional networking, which device can implement an IDS (intrusion detection system)_?
   - Middleboxes

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 3 Quiz

1. _The northbound interfaces separate the..._
   - Management plane and control plane
2. _The southbound interfaces separate the..._
   - Data plane and control plane
3. _OpenFlow is used in the <...>, and it is an example of a <...>_.
   1. Date plane
   2. Southbound interface

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 4 Quiz

1. _What action does an OpenFlow device take when an incoming flow does NOT match any rules in any of the flow tables in the pipeline_.
   - Sends a message to the controller
2. _Which type of message sent by an OpenFlow device to the network OS allows for quality of service (QoS) policies to be implemented_?
   - Flow statistics
3. _Which type of message would be sent by an OpenFlow device to the network OS in when it receives new routing information_?
   - An event-based message

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 5 Quiz

1. _A network controller prioritizes the rules generated by various services_.
   - True
2. _Which architecture provides the best throughput_?
   - A distributed controller with a centralized cluster of nodes
3. _Which architecture provides the highest level of fault tolerance_?
   - A distributed controller with a physically distributed set of elements
4. _Which architecture has the strongest consistency semantics_?
   - A centralized controller
5. _How does ONOS handle faults_?
   - If an ONOS instance fails, the other instances elect a new master for each of the switches that were previously controlled by the failed instance

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 6 Quiz

1. _The P4 programming language can also be used with a conventional network paradigm_.
   - False
2. _The P4 language is being developed as a replacement for OpenFlow_.
   - False
3. _The P4 language allows programmers to use multiple header fields to parse, match, and perform actions on packets_.
   - True
4. _The P4 language is used to program the <...> plane_.
   - Data
5. _A multi-port switch and a SmartNIC are two devices that can be programmed using P4. This is possible to which of the three primary goals of the language_?
   - Target independence
6. _The forwarding model used by P4 is a pipeline_.
   - True
7. _The match+action tables in P4 are more flexible than those in current version of OpenFlow_.
   - True
8. _What are the two operations in the P4 forwarding model_?
   - Configure and populate

### Lesson 8: SDN (Part 2) 7 Quiz

1. _Most SDN applications can be grouped into one of the five categories: traffic engineering, mobility and wireless, measurement and monitoring, security and dependability, and data center networking. Classify each application into an appropriate category_.
   1. Load balancing: traffic engineering
   2. Interference management: mobility and wireless
   3. Traffic estimation tool: measurement and monitoring
   4. Optimize network utilization: data center networking
   5. Minimizing power consumption: traffic engineering
   6. DoS attack mitigation: security and dependability
2. _The SDX architectures provides which of the following benefits_?
   - It provides an AS more flexibility for managing traffic
3. _In the SDX architecture, each participant AS must use the same network applications for traffic engineering_.
   - False
4. _In the SDX architecture, two autonomous systems can choose to only exchange video traffic_.
   - True
5. _Which of the follow are applications of the SDX architecture_?
   - All of the above
